Okay, the tapes are on. Mark, could you give me a little bit of your background,
how you grew up, and maybe how you got interested in writing, and what kind of
science backgrounds you might have had that might have pointed you towards
science fiction eventually? Sure. Well, I was born in 1946 in New Jersey, and
grew up in the suburbs outside of Philadelphia. I'd say that probably my
interest in literary matters got started when I was in grade school, junior high
school. My mother was a college-level English teacher, taught at Penn State, I
believe, University of Georgia. So I pretty much had a lot of books around at
all times and was encouraged to direct my interest in that direction. Um, as far
as starting writing goes, that was almost seemed to be the thing to do when I
was in grade school and began writing just short stories. It was a good play and
release for imagination and I certainly enjoyed it and the editors didn't share
my enthusiasm, however, and I have had not entirely a lot of success in short
stories, the only one I've ever published was sold when I finally got out here
to Idaho. In any event, I wrote Amateur Status as a hobby at Walter Junior High
in high school, and then when I got into college, I was very fortunate to go to
a place called Kenyon College in Ohio which has really quite a history my area
of study has always been the liberal arts the sciences I've frankly found to be
much too challenging much too much work what I do is science fiction only in the
sense that it's I'd say more fantasy than science fiction I don't really have
that much a grasp of hard science and us and bold science, but I certainly
appreciate the aesthetics of it, and that figures in I'd take a great deal in
the four novels in aberricks. I was very fortunate at Kenyon because I finally
decided that I was not going to sell short stories, and in my sophomore year
began my first novel, which was sold at the end of my junior year and came out
paperback with a paperback Lords of Starship, in the fall of 1967 that
apparently survived in the marketplace. It's since been reprinted, I believe,
England, France,
Italy, and Germany, as have the others. and wrote another one my senior year in
college. I won the Kenyan Review Prize for achievement in fiction, I think
primarily because I was the only college student writing novels. Everybody else
was fooling around with poetry and short stories. I won a scholarship to the New
York University Law School, Ruth Hilden Scholarship. The fact that it was free
pretty much determined my career choice because at no time was I under the
illusion that gainful living could be gotten from pursuing writing. Now, that's
maybe either a very good, cold, rational judgment on my part or pure cowardice.
In any event, I did go to New York, went through law school, wrote the third
novel, the shortest one, The Day Star, and while I was there spent the summer of
my second year with the legal department of Boise Cascade Corporation out here
in Boise, met the law firm that I joined after getting out of law school and
I've been with ever since. Since coming out to Boise I wrote just one other
novel that short story I mentioned but one other novel The Siege of Wonder and
that was published by Doubleday in 1976 and then I think by DAW in paperback the
next year and that I think is the best so far after that was published I became
married to a very wonderful woman Marica who already had two very wonderful
children when I met
and that has taken on some immediate responsibilities has become a partner in
the law firm seeing as how everybody well not everybody take that back a lot of
people expect you to be fairly grown up fairly grown up means that people don't
like science it doesn't mean that people don't like science fiction or reading
or writing but they do expect you to pay a little more attention to the job at
hand than speculating over your own personal fantasies Anyway, for whatever
reason there is, it already has kind of gotten lost in the early-burly, as it
were, and since that time I'm really kind of embarrassed to say that I have not
completed anything of any substance. The hope is still there, and I have what I
believe to be, and I hope will be, a viable idea for another novel, and I've
been pitching at it now for some time, and it's equally as much a matter of
trying to find a new focus because I believe that a lot of what I've already
written was threatening to become repetitious and self-cliche and also just
trying to do some new things. So that makes it perhaps doubly difficult to get
started and to stick with it, maintain the mood. Well, I guess, first of all, I
have to find the new booth before I can maintain it. And that's where it stands
right now. Okay. I was laughing whenever you were talking about growing up. So
that, yeah. I'm two years younger than you, and I, too, have a real-life job,
and I don't know what it means. I have to appear to be grown up anyway. What I
want to do now is go back over the individual works and see what we can dig out,
the things that were interesting to discuss. I need to turn an amplifier down.
Okay, now I can hear much better. You allowed that you had been writing since a
fairly early age, in grade school, in fact, and yet science never interested
you, but not the nuts and bolts. When you did start writing Why was it science
fiction And not historical fiction Or mainstream novels What was the attraction
Of science fantasy I guess is probably What you really write I guess the sheer
wonder First of all For an adolescent imagination It was a very easy one To slip
into An easy genre
To slip into It did not require you To embarrass yourself Particularly much by
trying to do things that you had no idea how they functioned writing about them,
like girls, it provided a great deal of play because you could allow your
imagination to free reign. So I guess it was kind of self-indulgent in that
sense. And that's the way that my imagination seemed to work. It took a very
peculiar, I thought, an individualized perspective. that wanted to express some
high-hopeable, not turn out to have been just a limited number of ideas and
feelings. And fantasy seemed to be best suited to it. Also, the combination of
fantasy and science fiction allowed me to work at, even then I think, an element
of irony and contradiction, which I've always enjoyed, and which is, I think
you've got to be pretty talented, much more than I, to do it in a real world
situation, historical or mainstream fiction.
There's also another thing, I guess, for I find humor very difficult. I pride
myself in normal life having a very good sense of humor. But the writing, none
of the books were in the least bit jolly, I'm afraid to say. And the
contradiction and the irony, I suppose, allowed for a reservoir of, I
guess, bitterness to just get on the outside, express itself, and to operate in
these half
-crippled, contradictory worlds that I just naturally seem drawn to.
Like I said, I hope I'm not going to stay there forever. I certainly don't want
to. But it had just a very peculiar allure to me, and also I was completely out
of step with what contemporary adolescent society was saying what literally
sensitive kids ought to be doing so they're inclined to do the exact positive
and try to offend my peers and I think I succeeded on more than one occasion
than I should and I said I said I was very tolerant and I think I wanted to
genuinely eccentric and stimulating
places I've been to. So that's... Also, I'll bring up one more thing. The works
that the books that I was reading at the time of the novels that I was
thoroughly impressed by and included Bradbury's work and later on College
Tolkien and on TV at the time, of course, which is a very favored Twilight Zone,
that sort of thing. So it kind of cut down the conversation when you attempted
to tell people what you were doing, and either they weren't interested in
writing at all or the kind of writing they were interested in just simply didn't
match up with what this stuff was turning out as. But I just really enjoyed it.
I felt comfortable and felt that I could do it well. I think that's probably the
main reason. Okay, Lords of the Starship came out in 1967, and it was, as you
mentioned, it's kind of pessimistic. The decadent society's entropy is about
maximized, both socially and physically. That would be something which now we
would call probably a new wave, quote-unquote. were you influenced by people
like J.G. Ballard and Michael Moorcock and the people that wrote the new wave
science fiction, very British? Yeah, I was thoroughly impressed by Ballard's
stuff. Not really Moorcock too much. Poul Anderson, his adventures, I remember,
they were quite impressive. I especially like, again, to get back to the
contradiction, the survival of what our contemporary society is, its survival
into a totally unexpected, hopefully unexpected, society,
and a society of decline. That, in a way, and maybe this is a cheap reason for
doing it, but it allowed the aesthetics of what I view to be our science and
technology, even though it failed, I certainly don't blame what happened to
bring about the societies that are present in the first book but they failed to
stop them from occurring but they did survive in fragments and I'd like to think
that acquired some kind of a tragic heroism by what they were doing the bad
societies that were in the first book and really in the second or really caused
by whatever causes a bad society and simple stupidity.
The artifacts, which if we think back, I'm just trying to remember you. You're
my contemporary, so we can remember the great days in the 60s and so on. The
artifacts that I enjoyed writing about, the ships and the aircraft and the
devices and science and industry, they remain in isolation. they're usually
beset the people who are allied with them are if not heroic then they're
certainly not as bad as the other folks and that kind of threw them the
fragments into a contrast but at least I believe made them a little on the
heroic side because they battled against the inevitable and I really liked that
man. This idea of the society constructing a starship or a mythical starship
which is going to take centuries to complete, is there any, I know you were a
history major, is there any kind of historical precedent for that on a much
smaller scale that gave you the idea? No, not at all. The idea itself, I'm
really trying to think back because the individual suggestions you get when
you're thinking about trying to start a story, and you're gathering the hooks
and suggestions that pop up can be so minor that I'm just trying to think back
and I can't really remember any similar historical parallel, although I'm sure
it's been tried and oh, I guess the government's come to mind, although as much
of a social purpose as any expression of a religious ideal or civil engineering.
I think what it came out as is first of all just the sheer image of something
that spectacular and given the image then I thought, well, how can we make it
contradictory? And it became contradictory by turning the hope into the eventual
reason of ruin, and it proceeded along those lines. Nothing that I'm thinking of
them as a reader of history. I don't think he suggested it. That's the way the
idea evolved. It was a very entertaining book because it did evolve as it was
being written. It was a lot of fun. And you were a sophomore in college that was
written. Right. Did you get encouragement from your peers, your professors? Did
they know what you were doing? well my English professor very fine fellow named
Norman Feldez freshman year I showed some of my short stories to and he was one
of the few people who says it's pretty good stuff so I keep at it the problem I
had with Kenyon was that the English department was so good I was a little
scared of it that's another reason why I stayed as a history major
the encouragement I had people generally what I related to them were pretty
encouraging but it wasn't what you might say a literary environment in the sense
that my everyday the people I in eternity and in class and so on like that there
wasn't any seething hotbed of you know literary endeavor, what are you doing,
what are you trying to say and all that sort of nonsense it was being built and
there was interest and I was able to talk about it and at least
the interest was there. It was a men's college, so the social structure was
considerably simplified over a very small men's college, too. The social
structure was considerably simplified, I gather, over what would have been a
comparable large co-ed university. and even though the social forms weren't
there, the eccentricity was and that, I think, is what helped it along and maybe
even allowed it to grow in what I think, what I hope was in a nice kind of
twisting and unexpected way as far as the plot and setting and so on goes. As
far as my mother was, of course, a great encouragement when I was writing. As
far as high school goes, my English teacher in my senior year in honors English,
he was quite definite after being shown some of my stuff that I could not write.
So that was a lot of encouragement from that. And, of course, in law school,
nobody reads, so they hardly have any idea what writing is, and that wasn't any
encouragement at all. But by then, I was pretty much going by myself.
How does a college sophomore then get his manuscript published? Did you have any
extra problems with that? Well, this I was kind of lucky when I did my amateur.
Are you still there? Yeah, I can hear you fine. Okay. I was pretty lucky. I did
a little amateur market research and immediately saw during those days that Ace
Paperbacks was easily publishing the greatest volume of titles. and they had
some very good authors, and they had a lot of real stinkers. So I thought, well,
obviously that's the place to go, and my family is, as I said, outside of
Philadelphia, and during one vacation my sophomore and junior year, I simply put
the only final copy of it I had in the paper bag and left it off at the desk
with a letter and went back to college and a month or two later my parents
called me up told me I had an offer a nice letter from Donald Wilheim the editor
to publish it with more money than certainly I'd ever seen in one place before
which is not much but it was more than I'd seen and I had a pretty good time and
then it came out so that's sounds a little you know shot in the dark that's
exactly what it was. Makes it sound easy. Well, I was lucky. Don Wollheim is a
really first rate guy and I certainly enjoyed all the dealings I've had with
him. And obviously he's got wonderful taste. Okay. Out of the Mouth of the
Dragon, as I read it, was set in the same milieu. Right. did you conceive of it
the basic idea of why you were finishing Lords of the Starship or did it just
spring out by self well it came after Lords of the Starship and I was kind of
wondering it was actually suggested by at least as I remember the sequence it
was suggested by a story by Faulkner called The Bear as I remember it in that
story there was just a little bit not terribly inventive but I've made an
impression on me where uh god creates man and then watches in horror as a man
runs around does all these unexpected terrible things well that's sort of me
thinking that obviously god created a great number of other things too time for
one and uh you know the course of the universe and what happens that they got
equally out of control uh that allowed well the next step from there of course
is to begin the story with what was supposed to have been the end of the world
armageddon and then show how time and the arranged plan of society or pardon me
the universe for that matter got progressively more chaotic and out of hand and
what does one do in such an environment of course I was real depressed when it
was written but the action basically revolved around these societies trying to
operate in what was becoming a progressively more random and blindly vicious
kind of universe where even the physical laws were getting out of hand and then
eventually reaching what was meant meant to be both a symbolic and a literal way
to end time, end time by, in essence, killing everything. And that's when the
hero at the end assumes a, I guess, an anti-Christ figure. And that, in essence,
. The ocean is a life force. Really, really, I didn't sound that ponderous when
it was written. But there is a basic symbolistic underlying underframe to a lot
of it. It also had a little idea in that, I think, which may have also come out
from the first, that in line with the orders of creation, you'd say that, well,
God of the motivating force creates man and time, or rather well he creates time
of course first and then man the physical universe and then the next level down
is when man creates machine as his little area of subcreation and then when the
creations of the divine creations fail to work correctly and get out of hand
then it's up to man and his subcreation, the machine to if not correct it then
at least bring some kind of relief from it and that's what they do.
I try to encourage people to read your work, although I don't loan my books out
because I'm a collector and they're getting old. Well, thank you. The potential
suicides or the depressed people, I don't encourage them to read it at the time.
Like I said, I just can't get the humor in there. I've got to try that more.
Yeah, because it starts out with Failure by Rupert Brooke which is not real
uplifting and then goes to Revelations and then on from there Yeah, it really
didn't cut a lot of monster with dates either, I'll tell you that Yeah
The image I wanted to talk to you about of Cavendish's talking skeleton, that
stuck with me since I read it and that really blew me away I don't like to ask
how people got ideas, but how the hell did you get that idea? It just seemed to
be the thing to do. I mean, if the antichrist is going towards some kind of
crucifixion of the universe, you might as well have a Last Supper, and he just
happened to be at what was originally an old battlefield, so I kind of screwed
up my courage and had
a couple beers and sat down and wrote it that way. it's just the very obvious
parallel way of supper. The idea of the artificial larynx in the Christ figure,
Timonius, I think his name was, that itself is a repeat of the idea of these sub
-creations of God, man, man-machine. And when the top level fails, then the
bottom level has to carry the burden. however clumsily or imperfectly. And when
the guy dies, his machinery keeps on talking and actually ends up telling the
truth. So, you know, how it came about it didn't really... it was just kind of a
progressive thing. That's continually...
that, I suppose, is the thing that brings one, or at least me, back to writing
along with the hopes that it just feels good even though it's hard. It's like
running every day. I don't do that every day either. But it's the excitement
that when you start doing these things,
at least I can't plan a story in advance. I don't outline things. I have basic
ideas and concepts and a rough idea of character and what's going to happen for
at least a measurable portion of the story. But once you get started, just the
background of the furniture that you're describing that you said about
constructing the physical world the characters are moving through that so often
suggests something new and unexpected and it never happens of course until you
sit down and actually do it because then you haven't picked out the detail that
suggests the next move the artificial larynx on the Christ figure out of the
mouth of the dragon was just in line with this basic idea. Well, you know, the
guy is trying to be a good Christ, and he's trying to tell his revelation, but
he gets caught in the battle on
the burn, which is even before the Armageddon, and, you know, he gets his voice
shot out, the very tool he was going to use to arouse righteousness again. that,
well, a man comes along and tries to give him something almost as good. And in
its way, it turns out to be, well, not as good as the first, the natural voice,
but it has its own virtues. First of all, it survives the Christ's death. And
secondly, like I said, it actually ends up telling the truth. So that's, you
know, I can't say that I found something or somebody said something to me. I
don't think what happened. I just sat down and wrote it. That's the way the
aesthetics or the furniture or the background or the layout of some initials
being suggested themselves and the direction the story went in. That's one of
the great sense of discovery you get when you're writing, one of the real
enjoyments. And it's also something that people don't write. Of course, they
don't write, so this never happens. So they're not convinced that it will
happen. So a lot of people conclude they can't, because they never do. Even for
people who have risen, such as myself, it's real, real easy. Even though you
remember that this is the way it almost, well, it very often works, as I was
about to say inevitably or invariably, but it's not that. But it certainly works
often enough to try it again. But convincing yourself that it's going to work
one more time is awful hard. And it's still a grind just to get there and put
the paper in and start telling who's in the room and how he's dressed. You don't
really start finding the little clues to what's going to happen next until you
do that.
Both of these books are critically acclaimed. I don't remember reading any bad
reviews. In fact, all the reviews have been laudatory. Would you just assume
write, say, a critically acclaimed book as one that makes a million dollars? I
mean, let alone, you know, assuming that you're comfortable and that you don't
need a million dollars. But is there some satisfaction there? Well, I really
don't think that I have enough either craft or talent to squander doing either
one or the other. The books that were written were the ones that I wanted to
write. Fortunately, I don't have to write for a living. Although perhaps if I
did, I might be doing something a lot more intense.
So I'm extremely gratified that people such as you still remember the darn
thing. That really makes a lot of it still worthwhile. But as far as the
difference between, does one address the critics, Does one address whatever one
conceives to be the upper crust of literary sensibility or does one go for the
great unwashed? Gee, I don't know if anybody can really make that conscious
choice. The idea of the polished hack is a great one, but I don't think there's
all that many of them around. There are people that have caught on. Harold
Rowles, of course, comes right to mind. And there are people who write very well
-acclaimed and moderately successful ones like John Gardner. He just died a
couple days ago. But I think basically they simply write what they think is
correct. And if they do that, they're going to do a good job. And even if it's a
piece of hack work, at least it will be a good piece of hack work and will hold
together in some coherent fashion. perhaps a fellow wants to do something that
appears to be a bit harder and of course we equate that too often with literary
endurance or artistic endurance then he's going to. The point is to do the good
story. If you do the good story what you think the good story is then I think
either way it turns out. and if it's critically acclaimed and still well
-remembered, gee, that's probably about as much as you could ask for. To make a
million bucks, that's not bad either. Okay, we'll move on to the Daystar. You
were in law school when you wrote the Daystar? Well, actually, I started that on
numerous occasions. I started it, I think while I was still in college. one
reason why is that the person I was dating at the time was convinced having read
the first two that I could not write anything in the least bit nice and this was
going to prove her wrong I began to think she was right when I didn't get very
far on it so after numerous false starts it just kind of laid around an
essential idea until the end of raw school I was in New York University at the
Washington Law School down on Washington Square, and Don Luckheim was still, at
that time, at DAW, or pardon me, A's, before he went to a new American library
and formed his own name under DAW. And I tried, I tried, and it always turned
out a little short and really pretty vague, and, can I say a nasty word on the
air? Go right ahead, yeah we don't have to put it on but go ahead and say it Ok
well the funny thing is this one story I really like it made me feel like a real
pro and like I knew what I was doing is I went up and after he said we couldn't
use it it was framed in the children's story originally and I asked him straight
ahead and I said well we worked the 4 together to a degree what's the problem
with it? and he said well you know it's kind of rough because it really doesn't
suit any of our audiences. It's certainly not a children's story. It's much too
complicated for that. And it's not really a science fiction story. So it really
doesn't address our customary audience. I said, gee whiz, what do I do with it?
Any suggestions? He kind of leaned back in his chair and waved. He said, oh,
throw in some of that scientific bullshit. You know how to do it. And I started
talking a little bit after that. And after about five minutes, after a little
discussion, We had an idea that eventually, well, right there, became the idea
of the time wind, blowing through the various worlds that were arranged in the
fashion of a nautilus shell and unifying them. And from there, I think that
learned a real note of coherency to what was going on and went back, rewrote it,
and sold. It came out under the DAW label. So that was a real nice little bit. I
really enjoyed that. This book seemed a lot more allegorical than the others.
They were more the straight science fantasy. I don't know if allegorical is the
right word. I'm not an English major. But just a little more magical and
whimsical than the others. That's the original trust of it. It was meant to be
much more of the idea of the dream world being more concrete than the waking
world and of multiple dream worlds beyond the one of immediate sleep. And then,
of course, the ghost can move back and forth because he is a dream character.
And then the hero becomes progressively more of a dream character himself, and
he can move back and forth through these worlds until he comes to the great
shining city of Karen
and finds out what's going on. Of course, at the end, he entered his own little
ruin and a little bit of despair because it is, after all, in my books, I
couldn't let anybody go happy. But it was originally intended as a children's
story. And I hope it didn't turn out to be too overwrought or too overblown or
too prolix. But that's the ephemeral kind of atmosphere I wanted to retain
throughout it's course. To me it seems like you have a little preface where you
say something, this is the way things were once explained to me, and that seems
kind of like a bridge between your old stuff because it's got the symbol of the
solitary machine lost during the rout of a long dead army. And then you moved to
this kind of dreamy book, and that almost seemed like a bridge to me when I read
it from your old stuff to your new stuff, which may be reading too much into it.
No, I think you're correct. There's also, as I felt at the time, because I was
most discouraged with the sort of people I met at law school. And I was kind of
wondering where my own perspective was going at that moment. and also this book
I had been writing it off and on for three years it seemed to be a little bit of
my own sentiment the way I felt at the time I thought the production the cover,
the George Barr cover and the George Barr
illustrations throughout the book that was a pretty classy package that Daw
doesn't seem to do that anymore Or how do you feel as an author, you know,
looking at your work and seeing the illustrations and that sort of thing? Are
they as you imagined them? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Very flattering, very thrilling.
Always nice to see your imagination visualized as well as, I guess, verbalized.
and it's always nice to know that somebody else read it too and found that even
though the guy was looking that it had enough of a power of suggestion that it
translated over into somebody else's imagination. As far as paintings go, I
still, my absolute favorite was the first cover on the paperback edition of Lord
of the Starship. That I really liked, Although I have to say all four have,
well, the first two were reprinted in hardcover in France last year in a single
hardcover volume, and then the third and fourth should be out right about now, I
believe by a French publishing house called OPTA, and they've just done a
beautiful job in their own illustrations and redoing the map of the world and
stuff like that. So that's always a very great thrill.
Okay, then the Siege of Wonder, which seemed to kind of get back to the same
theme as the original two books in the far future, but it had the fantasy
element, much more of a fantasy element, with the magic versus the science.
Right, well, it was a very clear cut. I wrote that. Again, this is to put it in
something of a social context. Let's see, 74 or 5, when I suppose all the
hippies were going into retirement. But, again, technology was not highly
thought of, but I believe then, and I still do right now, there's a great deal
of romance to it, a great deal of beauty, and, as I said, implicit and not
explicit heroism in its use. And so keeping that in mind, I was reading a book.
I think it was Algus Buttery's, I think, possibly. Anyway, a book of criticism
of science fiction and his critical history called The Billion Year Spree.
That's Brian Aldiss. Yeah, very good book. The very obvious
fact that there isn't that terribly much of a difference between fantasy,
classical fantasy, sword and sorcery, and science fiction. even space opera
science fiction because each one ultimately depends on the impossible to forward
the action. On the one, you have turning light to gold in the prince of the
frogs, which is a physical impossibility. On the other, you have physical ships
exceeding the speed of light, which as far as we know is an equal impossibility.
So they really both proceed from the same suspension of disbelief, as Coleridge
would say, but very often you do get not so much anymore but you do get this
artificially sharp distinction between fantasy on the one hand The Lord of the
Rings and let's say the analog school of science fiction well so given that it
occurred to me that why not just cut out the shilly-shilling and just have a
direct collision between the two and that's where you get The War Between
Science and Magic. The way I envisioned it, again, although it has an ending
that's typical for me with despair and all that, but the way I thought about
that book was really, if you remember Bill Maldon's cartoon character is Joe and
Willie, and it's kind of like Joe and Willie meet Elric, where you do have the
grand biliquance of fantasy, confronted by the very real and very truly
destructive or powerful, but by the same token, I think more humane forces of
science and technology. At least that's the way I saw it. And the direct
collision of the two, neither are particularly nice guys, although I found, and
I think it came across of the greater sympathy and the side of science. Even
though what they were doing was ultimately self-destructive or dehumanizing,
which is a little contradictory. I try to say that's more humane, but perhaps
even in that sense, still more humane than what magic has allowed itself to
become. Again, that didn't cut a lot of mustard for it. Okay, you were in Idaho
by the time this one was published? Oh yes, that was written in entirely out
here. Okay. I had a job when I was at that. What I better do is
turn my tape over, I have four more questions on my list. If you're not tired of
this already, let me turn my tapes over and get them. If you wanna take a break
or something, go ahead. This will take me about two minutes. That's fine. okay